This is an interview with Dr. William Alex
McIntosh by Melanie Hopkins on November 20, 1988
at Texas A&M University concerning the Vietnam
War. In the interest of accumulating knowledge
about this war, I am going to donate this tape to
Texas A&M oral history collection in the
university archives. Is that all right with you?
That's fine. Would you tell me about your place and
date of birth? Okay, I was born in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, November 12, 1943. Okay, and what is
your educational background? a Ph.D. in
sociology that I got at Iowa State in 1975. And
prior to that, I got a master's degree at the same
school in sociology. And prior to that, in the
spring of 1967, I got a degree, a bachelor of
science in political science from the University
of California, Berkeley. What was your
connection with the Vietnam War? graduated, as I
said, in March 67. I left, actually left school,
finished my coursework in December of 1966.
At that time, everybody was being drafted after
four years of college, regardless of whether or
not they had a degree or not. And I knew at that time,
my student deferment would soon be up. And I had
prior to finishing school, had looked into the
Peace Corps and had found some information on an
organization called International Voluntary
Services. I applied to both. I was very interested
in going to someplace in Southeast Asia to work for
a couple of reasons. One, I had taken a lot of
courses on Southeast Asia and so wanted to see what
it was like firsthand. And secondly, sort of felt
ambivalent about the war, wanted to serve my
country, but at the same time not participate in
the war itself. And so I was hoping to work in
Southeast Asia in a peaceful kind of setting, or
working in peaceful means. Peace Corps offered me
a couple of possibilities. One was in Tibet, which
is not in Southeast Asia, so I turned that down, and
the other was in the Philippines. It was teaching
English, and I didn't want to do that. And also, the
Philippines is a Catholic country, and I wanted to
work in a country that was non-Christian just to
have some exposure to a different religion.
International Voluntary Services interviewed
me in December of 1966, offered me a job early in
1967. I said yes. My eagerness to become a part of
this organization was heightened by having a
physical exam, being called in for a physical by
the military forces, passing that with flying
colors and being told that I could expect to be
called up within a short period after having
passed this physical. So I worked something out
with my draft board. They basically said that I
could spend two years with International
Volunteer Services. At that time, I thought I was
going to Vietnam. But they say after that two-year
period, then they would draft me. Well, I thought,
I'll go to Vietnam, do something positive there.
And maybe in the meantime, something positive
will happen with regard to the outcome of the war.
About a month before I was supposed to go, for
training that would start in Washington, end up in
the Philippines, and then I would go to Vietnam. I
got a telegram saying that they had too many people
going to Vietnam, not enough going to Laos. And I
had a choice. I could either go to Laos, or I could
wait and go to Vietnam in June. I felt that if I
waited, I would be drafted. And so I said, I'll go to
Laos.
Like I said, March was the start of training. I
spent two weeks in Washington every day, kinds of
meetings, meeting with former volunteers,
members of the State Department, historians,
anthropologists, did a little role playing, that
kind of thing. We were then taken to the
Philippines, spent approximately a month at the
International Rice Research Institute, in the
Philippines, a little town called Los Banos that I
don't remember. We were trained how to grow one of
the miracle rice varieties. Was also given some
training in well digging and water seal toilet
construction. And then some, we had a lot of
lectures on community development and that sort
of thing. Was then shipped to Laos and spent
another couple of months in language training and
again was given some training in well digging,
that sort of thing. We were flown around the
country and shown various projects that other
volunteers were doing and then after being there a
couple of months we were all given our
assignments. I was assigned to a program called a
forward area program And let me take this all back a
step or two. International Voluntary Services
had a contract with the U.S. government. We were
contracted by the U.S. Agency for International
Development to be basically the field
representatives of AID in local communities.
Currently, this was done for a couple of reasons.
One, there had been a big foreign aid scandal back
in 1958. And Laos was part of that scandal, where a
lot of money was kind of flowing into the top with no
accountability. And so money for things like
extending the airport to make it into a quote
unquote international airfield. You know, the
actual bags of cement were stolen. So the victory
monument, a victory monument to show that the Lao
had had defeated the French and thrown off the
bonds of colonialism back in 1954. So this
monument could be built, and it was built exactly
one meter taller than the French victory
monument. But at any rate, the cement for that came
stolen basically from this project. Well, at any
rate, there was a big scandal over this, and there
was some debate over whether or not aid should be
continued For this country, on the other hand,
there was a civil war going on. One side was
communist, the other side was sort of right-wing
to neutralist, and so I guess the Congress decided
that it was important to continue to give the
right-wing and neutralists foreign aid, but
there had to be a lot more strings attached, more
controls. And so what was set up was a kind of, what
one of my friends characterized as a parallel
government in which from the ambassador all the
way down, to the village level where a lot of the
money and materiel was going for projects, there
would be an American pair of hens from the top all
the way to the bottom. So the Lao never really had a
chance to steal from this program because they
never had a hold of it. There was somebody at the
bottom who supervised disbursement of things
generally for the for community development
projects. Okay, back to IVS and my assignment. I
was assigned to a program called Forward Area
Program. The Forward Area Program was an AID
brainchild that located always a young, male,
American, single, the person had to be single.
They would be placed in an area that had just been
taken out of the hands of the communists. And the
idea was that if you had put somebody into this
area, they would be a funnel for rapid supplies of
aid, you know, rapid influx of cement, roofing
tin, nails, bolts, so on and so forth, so you could
build schools, dig wells, build markets, you
know, whatever local people wanted There would be
somebody there, and the usual red tape in terms of
getting the Lao government to sign all kinds of
forms and AID to sign all kinds of forms that other
people experienced, all of that was cut to a
minimum so that there could be an immediate high
impact. And the idea was to, in essence,
demonstrate to people that the Lao government,
through help of the American government, was
really interested in and local people. And so
you'd have a bunch of, you know, you'd have people
who were being exposed to, you know, this massive
amount of aid, you know, after having just lived
under the communists so that they would have this
contrast. You know, they would have this mental
comparison that they would be making about what it
was like, you know, under the communists versus
the American-backed royal government.
Apparently not very much because there was not
very much for them that the communists had to give.
In fact, the communists apparently mostly
redistributed property, drafted people into the
army, their army, lived off You know, they paid
peasants, for instance, in script for rice and
things that they ate. But in general, they had very
little to give. They mostly took. But that was
also, to a degree, true of the other side. The other
side kind of preyed on locals,
sometimes unofficially, because the Americans
supposedly were paying all the bills, and so there
was no reason to extract rice or anything else from
local people. But there were always lots of abuses
of that because it was, you know, it's hard to
monitor what goes on. And I saw personally, you
know, instances where a local military commander
would basically exploit peasants because he had
troops that he could use to, to back up any claims
that he might have on somebody's land. And there
was very little that people could do about it. I got
involved in a couple of local disputes in terms of a
commander making demands on locals. And the word
filtered through the grapevine back to me that the
guy would have me killed if I continued to do it. So I
had the choice of either moving learning to work
within the system, and I felt as though anywhere I
went I would run into the same problem, that I would
just have to keep my nose out of those sorts of
things. At any rate, the forward area program was
sort of blatantly a political kind of thing. Yeah,
it was, in fact, the guy who ran the program was a
retired Marine colonel who had spent all of his
time or the majority of his career in the Marines in
Southeast Asia, in China. He was highly
experienced. He had a master's degree in
anthropology, but he was very hard-nosed. And in
fact, when I left the country, he had decided that
this winning hearts and minds was probably less
important. He basically said, if you grab them by
their privates, their hearts and minds will
follow, which was a phrase that he had picked up
from, you know, that had been a phrase floating
around Vietnam, apparently, for quite some time.
And he had sort of switched his orientation, or at
least verbally was changing the way he dealt with
people who worked for him. At any rate, the reason I
mention this is because when I joined this
organization, one of the things that appealed to
me was that it was, because it was a private
organization, it could claim that it was
nonpolitical, nonsectarian, so on and so forth.
Well, political in the 1960s had a very specific
meaning, or at least it did when a lot of us read that
word and volunteered. It meant, well, you know,
this organization is neutral, and so even though
we knew we were working for the American
government, we, I think, all kind of naively had
the impression that we would be able to... you
know, to basically do strictly community
development kinds of things. And, you know, if it
made somebody look good, then that was just kind of
an afterthought or a lucky byproduct. But, you
know, we were, for the most part, interested in
helping people regardless of, you know, who
looked good as a consequence.
But the organization was formed in the 1950s and
the non-political and non-sectarian
terminology was developed then. And what many of
us came to discover was that non-political simply
meant that the organization didn't go after
Republicans or Democrats. They were after young
Americans to go do this field work. It was a very
political organization in the first sense that I
was talking about because everything that we did
had to be approved by AID and AID was only
interested in things that would benefit the local
people but at the same time give credit to the Lao
government and also not shake any of the social
structure or economic structure up in any
particular way. In other words, don't do anything
that as a consequence would make the government
look bad or cause people to question economic
arrangements. It was permissible to make people
better off economically, but not at somebody
else's expense, so on and so forth.
I was kind of offended by all this. I know there's a
lot to talk about, but one of the things I'm going to
mention is that when I got there, I was so upset by
having felt like I had been hoodwinked that I
started a letter writing campaign. And I got a
bunch of other volunteers who were kind of
appalled by this whole thing to write letters as
well. And we, within a year, had gotten this
program killed, at least in the sense that they
weren't going to send any more IVS volunteers into
the forward area program. And we were We did it for a
couple reasons. One, because it was highly
political, and two, it was very unsafe. The day I
arrived in the country to begin my language
training, they brought a body out. Some kid had
been shot in his sleep. He had been warned, but had
decided that he had enough personal contacts in
the local area that in essence people would
intervene and he wouldn't be Well, he turned out to
be wrong and was apparently shot while he slept in
his bed. And during the time I was there, I lost
about six friends because they were, in essence,
assassinated because of their connection to the
American effort, which was connected to one
particular side in this conflict. And so that was
the second reason for trying to kill this program,
because it was dangerous as hell. My first
assignment was in a
place in the southern part of the country near the
Ho Chi Minh Trail. It was never safe enough for me to
go to work there. In fact, it was never safe enough
for me to even visit. In fact, they kept me in limbo
for a while until... such time that they thought it
was going to be safe. And in the meantime, I got
involved in other things. But I think that was kind
of indicative of the kind of program it was. They
put you in very unsafe conditions. They did give
you all kinds of radios and something that was
termed a bug-out bag. We had a bag that had an
air-to-ground radio, a portable
single-sideband radio that was connected via an
aerial and batteries to radios of a similar type
within about 200 to 300 miles. And with that kind of
radius, in most parts of Laos, you could not only
raise other people with similar radios inside
Laos, but you could even reach people in Thailand.
And so it felt like if you had to leave in a hurry and
go hide in the jungle. We had all these radios that
you can utilize to get yourself out of the dam. They
didn't give us weapons. And in fact, our
organization
basically told us, if you are working in a place
where you feel like you need to be armed, then you
shouldn't be working there. But that was always
kind of a catch-22, because a good deal of the
places we worked had the chance over time not to be
unsafe, particularly the longer you were there,
the more impact you might have. And that was
eventually going to draw somebody's attention.
So for the most part, the people that I knew that
were working in the country stayed unarmed. I
never armed myself. But one of the guys I worked
with had his father send him through the
government mail a pistol. He had a .22 Magnum
pistol. and kept under his pillow. At any rate,
what I did there, well, I was supposed to be in this
forward area program. The place I was initially
assigned in the South was never safe enough for me
to visit. I finally convinced people to let me work
someplace else, at least temporarily. They were
going to have me sit on my hands, I guess, forever.
And I was young and eager, and I wanted to get
started. I'd been in training for three months. I
had, in essence, a year and nine months left, so I
wanted to get started on being a volunteer. So I
found out that there were a couple of guys working
in the oldest forward area in the program in the
country. In fact, it was... old and safe enough so
that they were going to change its status and they
were going to start moving couples into there and
have men and women, married couples, again,
Americans for the most part, live and work there
and do, you know, kind of a broader range of
activities. You know, more red tape wouldn't take
us long, but, you know, it was thought that this
particular area had been you know, receiving high
impact long enough, and it was time to kind of slow
things down and go through normal channels. The
guys that were working there had a, for the most
part, a well digging program going on. That was
about the only thing that they, there had been a lot
of schools and that stuff built already, and so
about the only thing that was left that local
people seemed to be interested in was having
wells. So I volunteered to go work with the two guys
that were working there. One was a guy from
England, and another was a guy from the States
somewhere. And I thought, if I just work with them,
at least I get some experience in the field, get to
practice my language, and then in the meantime,
maybe where I was supposed to go would get safe, or
maybe they would reassign me, but at least I
wouldn't be sitting on my hands. So I went out on the
field with the Englishman, the American, whose
name was Jerry Lewis, of all things, I was on
vacation, so I slept down on Terry's cot. We were
renting the upstairs floor of a wooden building. A
Chinese family owned this building. They lived on
the ground floor. Their store was on the ground
floor. That's how they made their living. And then
we rented the upstairs. And the upstairs was a
great big... It was just like a dormitory in some
sense. It was a very big building. We had a kitchen.
We had kind of a meeting room, living room. There
was one bedroom that the two volunteers slept in.
And then there was a kind of a long dormitory type
room in which a couple of Thai engineers and some
trainees that worked for them lived. And those
individuals were involved in building dams in
that area. So there was a lot of stuff going on. At
any rate, I was there four days and on the night On
the fourth day, somebody came into our backyard,
the path at Leno, and fired a rocket at our open
window. Missed it. The rocket went through there,
pierced the kitchen wall, hit a frying pan
apparently hanging on the kitchen wall and
exploded, destroying the kitchen, setting the
place on fire. And then some other individuals put
about 22 rounds of AK-47 fire in about floor level,
hoping to hit us in our cots. The bullets came in at
an angle, and by the time they were near us, they
were already on their way out of the room through
the ceiling. So none of us were hit directly by
these bullets. One of the bullets, however,
ricocheted down and hit the Englishman who was
sleeping next to me in a cot in the back. Apparently
the bullet had lost a lot of steam by this time, and
so what he got was a kind of a long flesh wound down
his back. Another bullet ricocheted and hit one of
the Thai engineers in the foot, and then a third
bullet ricocheted and hit a kid in the body who was a
Chinese child who was living with his family below
us. So there were three people wounded. We were
evacuated at 6 in the morning by basically a
military helicopter that had flown from
Thailand. It was an American military helicopter
who flew us out. We were unable to get out any sooner
because it was dark, and we also were having
trouble. This was 11 at night when all of this
happened. We were also having trouble with our
radio.
Let's see. And then I did a lot of odd jobs around the
country, worked two or three other places. Two of
the other places I worked, I stayed in for, in one
place, 14 months, another place about nine
months. Both became so unsafe that I had to
eventually leave. I spent most of my time doing
things like, again, digging some wells, building
a market, helped in a rice demonstration program,
and then bought rice from local people, that kind
of thing. What experiences did you have with the
U.S. government? Well, I was a direct employee
because of our contract. I was supervised in the
field basically by AID, personnel all the people I
work for turn out were former Peace Corps
volunteers and so while they weren't necessarily
neutral with regard to the war at least they
understood what it meant to be a volunteer and they
tried to give us as much autonomy as possible but at
the same time you know this business of war was
always very close at hand because Again, we were
associated with the U.S. government backed side,
excuse me, of things, doing programs that were
designed to, in essence, shore up the popularity,
increase the popularity of the royal Lao
government, which was at war with a communist
side. And the communists Lao forces were
supported by Vietnamese communists. So it was, in
many senses, an extinction of the Vietnam War.
There were about 40,000 troops from Vietnam
stationed in Laos backing up the path at Lao. That
was the name of the communist group in Laos.
And a good deal of the ferocity of what went on there
was due to the fact that the Vietnamese were there
to win. The Lao were always on both sides fairly
hang loose. But the fact that you had Americans
pushing one side and the Vietnamese pushing the
other tended to make the war probably worse than it
would have been had these two sides been fighting
on their own. In fact, I suspect it would have
ended, it went on 25 years before the Vietnamese
basically won. But I think it would have ended a lot
sooner had there not been two outside parties,
basically. Sort of like a fight in which two people
are fighting one another and at a point they would
both like to quit, but there are too many people
that are egging them on, so they're unable to quit.
Uh, so I, you know, work on a daily basis,
basically, for the American government. I had to
make radio check twice a day to let people know that
I was all right. And if you didn't, if you failed to
make radio check, then they would send Air America
planes out to search for you, because the
assumption was that if you made radio check,
something didn't make it, you know, something was
wrong. And if it turned out you didn't make radio
check because, uh, you know, had gotten drunk or
just, you know, slept through it, or just, you
know, got busy and forgot, then you had to pay for
the airtime. And the little aircraft costs $100 an
hour, and the larger ones $200 an hour. There was
somebody who had done exactly this and wound up
owing the American government close to $1,000.
which was taken out of his $80 a month for the rest of
the time it was there. The reason that our safety,
as it turns out, was such a big deal was because, as
we were told by the ambassador, the American
ambassador to the country towards the end of my
stay there, that they didn't want deaths of young
Americans appearing in American newspapers
because people would start saying, well, wait a
minute, this kid was killed in Laos. Don't we have a
treaty of neutrality with those people? What's
going on here? And then somebody would call up
their congressman and say, look, what's going on?
A kid from my state or my child was killed in Laos,
was shot. How come? We're supposed to be, you know,
we're not at war there. We signed this treaty of
neutrality. What's going on? So we were told, you
know, fairly bluntly, we want to keep you alive
because we don't want... anybody raising
questions. And any time one of us was killed, Radio
Moscow would announce it as the assassination of a
member of the CIA. Every time one of my friends was
killed, that's how their death was publicized
by that side. We got a member of the CIA.
we were, none of us, or at least the people I knew, I
wasn't a member of the CIA, and the organization I
worked for, IVS, was very careful to try to avoid
that kind of infiltration, but there was always
some suspicion on our part that because there were
some people in IVS who were very ideological and
very involved in the war, very interested in it,
that there might be some people who were in the
employ of the CIA, and we weren't so worried that
they were spying on us. We just were concerned that
they might, in essence, do things that would
simply reinforce the image that, well, these are
no more than American employees, even though they
call themselves members of IBS and they claim to be
independent volunteers. They're just, in
effect, the same thing, the CIA, and so it's OK to
kill them. There was a great effort to try to
separate ourselves as much as possible from the
American government, despite the fact that we
were working in an American government program,
because we were trying to minimize the jeopardy
that people's lives were in. And again, frankly, a
lot of us were there not because of the propaganda
value that we posed, but rather just to try to help
people. people regardless of who they're credit
for. Did you have any, do you know of any whatever
that was involved in CIA? Did you ever run into any?
Well, it turns out that the Air America, which was
supposedly a private firm, I learned, in fact this
was in Newsweek and a lot of news
broadcasts and so on and so forth a couple of years
after I came back from Southeast Asia. It turned
out that it was a dummy corporation owned by the
CIA. So in other words, the people that flew us all
over the country, we flew around the country
because of either there not being any road
transportation, and so your only choice was to fly
in and out of areas where you work, or because it was
too unsafe. And I flew generally because of a
combination of those two. And so in that regard, we
had that kind of connection. There were a lot of
stories that the CIA was working very closely with
the embassy, and it was very clear that the embassy
was having a lot to say about how the aid program was
working. And so I'm sure that inadvertently we had
lots of contact with the CIA. We just didn't know
about it, to kind of give you an illustration of...
you know, how closely tied to the embassy we were.
One time, one person who worked for us, Lau, was
killed, shot on the way back to the house we were all
living in. He'd been working in a village, and he
had decided to walk with one other guy. It was about
a 10-mile walk, and he got within about four miles
of where we lived, And somebody came out from some
bushes, a couple of people, with automatic
weapons and shot at he and this other guy. The other
guy was able to escape. He was hit in the head almost
immediately, died instantly.
We took his body back to the Capitol so he could be
cremated and so his family, who were from another
part of the country, could have a funeral. And then
I flew back in with my immediate aid supervisor to
see how he wanted to fly in to make sure everything
was okay before he left me there. And apparently
another Lauer who was working for us, who was
making radio check while everybody was gone, had
reported some kind of fighting nearby. We
frequently reported that, not because we were
trying to gather information, but we were
basically trying to get somebody to tell us, gee,
that body's awfully close to you, maybe you ought
to come out of there. In other words, we frequently
reported that kind of thing just to get some kind of
check from somebody who knew about military
matters as to whether or not we were safe. And he
apparently reported some kind of attack on a
village... And he either garbled it or the person
monitoring this call garbled it. But at any rate,
we landed. We made radio checks saying we got
there. And apparently, as we were making this
radio check, there was a squadron of these old
World War II aircraft that had been ordered by the
American ambassador to do a bombing raid on our
where we were living because somehow this gobble
radio message had come out that I was there, the
other American that I know was there, we were
trapped in our house, we were surrounded by Path at
Lowe, and so these guys were going to come in and do a
bombing round around our home. Well, around our
home were a lot of civilian houses, and so
somebody... put two and two together and
realized, well, if we had just flown in, we could
hardly be under attack. And we had, you know, we
called in and said we had just flown in and hadn't
said that things were abnormal until somebody
realized, hey, we're going to, you know, we're
sending somebody to bomb and those guys are okay.
And so they managed to call off this attack. But in
essence, that kind of illustrates how closely
tied we were with the American effort. And since
the CIA was highly involved in What was going on
there, and it turns out, incidentally, that AID
was used as kind of a cover since it was, you know,
AID is a branch of the State Department, but it was
being used in Laos as a funnel for military aid. We
had signed a treaty of neutrality in 1962 saying
that we wouldn't give aid to any side, But we were
still buying, basically giving the Lao
government all of its weapons and even its
uniforms. We were buying uniforms from Hong Kong,
and they were being shipped to the country so that
the Lao government would have a military that had
uniforms. We were paying for all the food in the
military. We were paying everybody's salary. It
was basically a war that was paid for by us, but we
had signed this treaty saying that we weren't
supposed to do that, so it all had to be in some sort
of bookkeeping fashion, be accounted for in terms
of, I suppose, Rice, Roofington, who knows how
they did it. But at any rate, so it's easy to see, at
least from my standpoint, why we were targets,
because we were part of this program that was
military, that was CIA, so on and so forth.